## Getting and Cleaning Data Course Assignment

### Files

The following files form part of the Getting and Cleaning Data project assignment submission:

1. **run_analysis.R** (secured in GitHub - script for generating the required tidy data sets).
2. **CodeBook.md** (secured in GitHub - CodeBook describing the Variables, and other data features and background for the data contained in the output data sets).
3. **README.md** (secured in GitHub - this file - overview of files included in the project and configuration for running the script).
4. **tidy_stdmean.tx**t (secured in GitHub - tidy data set out put for steps up to the end of step 4.
5. **tidy_avgs.txt** (Secured in GitHub and submitted as part of the project submission page - tidy data set output for the results of the end of step 5.)

### Github Repository

Where data has been stored in GitHub the files are located in the following repository:

- [https://github.com/pduff1/Coursera_GettingAndCleaningData_Assignment](https://github.com/pduff1/Coursera_GettingAndCleaningData_Assignment)

### run_analysis.R pre-requisites

The data sets outputs for the Getting and Cleaning Data project assignment are generated by the "run_analysis.R".

This script should be run in the R working directory and relies on a number of pre-requisites:

- The data supplied for the project should be available in the Working directory (e.g. the content of the top level data folder and sub folders is placed in the working directory).  This is achieved by unzipping the contents of the following folder (supplied for the project) and placing the content in the R working directory (so that the "UCI HAR Dataset" folder is visible in the R working directory):

	[https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip](https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip)


- The script requires the plyr and dplyr packages to be installed and loaded
	- This needs to be performed in the following order to avoid issues:
		1. plyr
		1. dplyr
	- The run_analysis.R script includes the library(plyr) and library(dplyr) calls, but not the installation commands, as it is assumed that this is better carried out manually if the packages are not already installed.
	- The run_analysis.R script should be extracted from the following GitHub repo and placed in the R working directory:
	[https://github.com/pduff1/Coursera_GettingAndCleaningData_Assignment](https://github.com/pduff1/Coursera_GettingAndCleaningData_Assignment)
	- The run_analysis.R script should be run from the R working directory when configured as described above.

### run_analysis.R running

The run_analysis.R script should be run using the following command on the R command line:

- source("run_analysis.R").

Note: the script has not been placed within a function and therefore cannot be called by the "run_analysis()" command.  This done to capture all intermediary data structures during development and to have these available once the script has run.  This approach has been preserved in the submitted version to make this data available to anyone testing the script.  Therefore the command listed above must be used to run the script.

The script was developed and run using the R Console, but should run in the same if being run from R Studio.

The run_analysis.R script can take a while to run, and should provide the following feed back during running:

- A unique Variable names check for the output data sets (There 68 columns in the output data set and therefore the count of unique columns should be 68).
- Notification that the file for tidy_stdmean.txt is being created
- Notification that the file for tiday_avgs.txt is being created

### run_analysis.R output

To meet the Project criteria the run_analysis script generates 2 output files (to the R working directory) containing data sets as follows:

- **tidy_stdmean.txt** - this is the output at the end of step 4. containing data for all observations for each subject across the merged training and test data sets, for each activity, with variables for measurements on the mean and standard deviation only.
- **tidy_avgs.txt** - this is the output from the end of step 5. containing data for the average of each variable for each activity and each subject.

Prior to submission the above files have been secured to GitHub and in the case of tidy_avgs.txt submitted in the appropriate field on the assignment submission page.

During the development of run_analysis.R data was viewed and checked using the R View() function as this provides a way of easily viewing large data sets once read into R.

The R read.table() function is a suitable way of reading the data from the output files .txt files into an R structure that can be queried and viewed using the View() command as suggested above. E.g.:

- mydata <- read.table("tidy_avgs.txt", header=TRUE)
- View(mydata)

use of header=TRUE argument in the read.table call will enable the first row of data to be treated as header data.

### Further Background Information

Further background on the data and source data files is included in the CodeBook.md file.

Further background on the decisions made while formatting and tidying the data are contained in both CodeBook.md and in the comments for the run_analysis.R script.